>> Hey, Sarah.
>> Hello.
>> Hey, welcome.
Everyone who happens to be watching live, please put some
thoughts and feedback in the live chat.
We'll try to make that part of the show.
And with that, let's just kick this off.
Sarah, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
>> Thank you so much.
Thank you for having me.
>> Yeah, I'm very excited to have you on the show.
Ever since I saw that first picture of you, I've been
thinking, oh, my gosh, I'm going to be on the show.
I'm going to be on the show.
Ever since I saw that first picture of the black hole
and heard the news, I didn't know, but I thought,
there has to be some Python going on here, huh?
- Oh yeah, definitely.
We got a lot of traction from our Matplotlib plots
that seemed to catch the eye of many developers.
- Oh, I see, it is, it is, it is, it is Python.
I see, look, there it is.
I know that theme.
- That's right. - Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
So there's just many fascinating aspects of this.
The amount of data, the different data sources,
the earth scale telescope that you all created,
the processing with the pipeline and Python,
and just seeing stuff 55 million light years away at all,
which is dark, is kind of crazy.
But before we get to all those fun topics,
let's just hear your story.
How do you get into programming and get to the Python side of these things?
And how do you get going in black holes, too?
Yeah, so just to introduce myself, hello, everyone.
My name is Sarah. I'm currently a member of the Event Horizon Telescope Project,
the team that makes images of black holes.
I've been interested in astronomy since I was a little kid.
Since I was eight years old, I got to in second grade,
I got to build a cardboard solar system.
I'm sure everybody has kind of had similar experiences.
That was really my first kind of introduction
into a world outside of our planet.
And I was just so fascinated by planets
that I kind of binged through all of the astronomy books
I could find at my local library
and fell in love with astronomy.
And so I ended up studying in kind of the physical sciences.
I did a bachelor's in physics.
And because I was doing a bachelor's in physics,
I didn't have astronomy courses as part of my program.
So that was something that was pretty disappointing to me
because I really wanted to do astronomy,
but I couldn't quite do that yet.
So as an undergrad,
I decided to do a summer project in astronomy.
So I emailed a professor or a number of professors
working in astronomy in the Netherlands.
And this professor responded a few minutes later
to my email, which I sent during Christmas holidays.
So I was very surprised that he'd respond.
And it turns out, he said it was unusual for him to get emails from students wanting to do work in the summer.
So he said, "Oh, come on by. I'll tell you about my project."
And he told me he was one of the big leads of this amazing adventure to take an image of a black hole.
And I thought that was the coolest thing I'd ever heard.
And I kind of jumped right in and undergrad and then continued my master's and PhD with the project.
And I've been here ever since.
And so Python, I got introduced to Python in undergrad
for programming kind of simple data analysis scripts.
Although most of my undergrad was spent on C programming
and MATLAB because it was very much on the physics side.
And this is mostly what physicists use.
But then when I transitioned into an astronomy program
my master's and PhD, it was really almost all Python. And so that kind of was a kind of learn
by doing kind of training that I had to do. I had to learn how to write. I didn't take any Python
classes really. Just kind of learn as I go with data processing analysis and then ended up playing
a big part in the EHT results. And it really plays a big part in most astronomy data analysis lately.
It seems like it's just taken over that world recently, at least for the analysis side, right?
Maybe not running on devices, right? There's probably, I don't think there's any Python
running on say JWST, but maybe some of the earthbound telescopes have some in play. I don't
know. Yeah. A lot of the data processing and analysis is done in Python. A lot of visualizations
are also done in Python. So it's become a very kind of versatile and flexible tool for us to
quickly kind of make figures for papers as many people have noticed in our papers are kind of
major kind of matplotlib tools that we use and to display our data. Yeah, exactly. I think it's
just completely taken over that space, which is really neat. And I think the Python world
is much better for having all of these scientists and folks with other backgrounds using it for
whatever that they're interested in, right? It's not just, well, here's how Instagram uses it,
and here's how this other API company uses it, right? There's a much more diverse mosaic of
interests and things people want from the language. Absolutely. I think one of the big
strengths that we drew from Python was really the open source community. There are many open source
codes available that we were able to make use of in astronomy that were not necessarily designed for
astronomy data science purposes, but that just happened to be really useful for what we were
trying to do with the data. And so it ended up saving us an enormous amount of time. And so
whenever we speak about our project, I try to make a big point of saying that we do rely a lot on the
open source development community, which I think is a part of the developer community that is often
overlooked, and that it's really important to support open source work, because a lot of it
is done by students and postdocs who are in the sciences, who just happen to need code to do a
certain thing and they make it available and it turns out to have many different uses in other
people's minds. And so we really build on the shoulders of all these people and it saves so
much time. Yeah, like Matplotlib or Pandas or a lot of these are absolutely right. Yeah.
So you gave a really great presentation, a keynote at PyCon 2022, and I'll be sure to
to link that and we'll pull some ideas out of there.
Before we get to really into the programming and Python
side of things, give us maybe just a little bit
of history of black holes.
A lot of this starts with Einstein, right?
And as soon as you see that dip, well,
if there's enough gravity here, but what if you put more?
And what if you put more?
How steep can that curve get until it--
and stuff falls into it and it gets steeper, right?
Give us the history.
- Yeah, actually the history starts,
I think in the 1700s, even before Einstein,
there was this Reverend, Reverend Mitchell,
who thought about this idea of, say,
when you have kind of something
trying to leave the earth's gravity,
it has a specific escape speed
in order to leave the earth's gravity.
And no matter the size and weight
of the object trying to leave,
it always has the same escape speed
because it depends on the gravity of the earth.
So he thought what would happen
if you would kind of make the earth so heavy, so compact
that the escape speed would become higher
than the speed of light.
And so he thought, he made this thought experiment
and he found out that by having the speed being higher
than the speed of light,
the star that you collapse ends up being dark
because all of the light that is at its surface
cannot escape, so you can't see it anymore.
If it doesn't get to your eye, you cannot see it.
So you end up with a dark star.
And that was this kind of thought experiment
that led to being a black hole.
This dark star is actually a black hole.
So even in the 1700s, philosophers, even religious people
like Reverend Mitchell thought about these ideas
about what it could look like if you had such an object.
And these objects often seem,
well, this was just a thought experiment.
And then when Einstein came along,
He tried to describe space and time and gravity
in a single unifying theory,
ended up the theory of general relativity.
And that was in 1915,
when he showed that light was actually affected by gravity,
so that light would bend around heavy objects
because of this bend in the space time.
And then a year later,
Carl Schwarzschild found the first kind of real solution
to Einstein's theory, to Einstein's equations,
which ended up in what we call the singularity,
which showed that there's this object
that is kind of a hole in the space time.
And this object has a horizon,
which we call the event horizon.
And this name, the size of the horizon,
the radius is called now the Schwarzschild radius
after Karl Schwarzschild.
And it showed that anything that goes beyond this horizon
can never come back because the escape speed at the horizon
is the speed of light.
So anything that goes beyond would
need to escape speed higher than the speed of light.
And light is the fastest thing that goes.
So nothing--
You're going to circle around and just kind of just--
Exactly.
Probably still move, but still be trapped within that space.
So you can never--
once you cross that point, you can never come back.
And at that time, so people thought a lot
about the theory of Einstein and this mathematical object
that we call the singularity.
And we, at the time they thought,
okay, black holes are mathematical objects,
but there's no way that could be real, right?
So people thought, okay, mathematically,
that's so interesting,
but these things can't exist in the universe.
And then in the 1930s, Chandrasekhar,
famous Indian astronomer,
he thought about the massive stars.
So they're, you know, stars when they die,
they become white dwarfs.
And so they die in these kind of stellar deaths, dead stars.
But then he thought, what about more massive stars?
Stars are much heavier.
It turns out that he calculated it
and white dwarfs have a maximum mass.
So there are certain classes of heavier stars
that could never end up as white dwarfs
because they would collapse to something more massive
than a white dwarf.
So it cannot be a white dwarf.
And it turns out what they collapse into is a black hole.
And this is the very first evidence
that black holes could exist in reality, in the universe,
that they're kind of a inevitable endpoint for heavy stars.
Ever since then, people have been thinking
about where to find them.
People have been detecting these powerful streams of gas
coming from centers of galaxies
that could only be powered by a black hole.
And the galaxy M87,
that's 55 million light years away from us,
does have one of these big streams.
So that was the very first stream of gas
from a center of a galaxy ever observed
by humanity in 1918.
They didn't know that it was gonna be a black hole
at the time, but then there was more and more evidence
that the only thing that could really power
this really powerful process had to be a black hole.
So we started then the story of trying to understand
what they would look like from an observer point of view.
How big does the black hole have to be for us
to be able to see it from Earth,
how big do we design a telescope that could see it?
And it turns out there are only two black holes in the sky
that are reachable with the telescope,
the size of the Earth,
that's our maximum size that we could go.
And one is this black hole in M87,
which we imaged in 2019.
And then the second one is our very own black hole
in our Milky Way, Sagittarius A*,
which we imaged in 2022, just last May.
- Oh, do you have pictures published of that?
- Yeah, that's right.
It came out on May 12th, 2022.
Yeah, just two weeks after my PyCon talk.
- Oh, what's the timing?
- Yeah, it was very frustrating
not to be able to say anything.
So I kept telling people, you know,
"Oh, please watch our news."
And you know, we have exciting stuff coming,
but I couldn't say anything.
- We have more pictures.
I'm sure you know I've seen them.
- Yeah.
- It's also worth pointing out this whole project
that you were on.
It's a long running project.
- Yes.
- When did it start?
I know it.
- Yeah, so the kind of the technology part
started in the late '90s
and then actually starting to add more and more telescopes
started in 2007.
So it is about a 10 year process
between the first telescopes that joined
and then the 2017 campaign
in which we had finally enough telescopes
to take the data to make images.
So about 10 years of building and we're still building.
We're still adding more telescopes.
We've added three more since then.
- Yeah, so this is called the Event Horizon Telescope
and it's a planet scale telescope.
I mean, I just saw a whole bunch of news
and cool pictures from JWST, James Webb Space Telescope.
- Yeah. - And it's huge,
but it's only like 30, how many meters across?
30 feet, some number of meters, 12 meters, I don't know.
It's not planet-sized.
- No.
- How do you build a planet-sized one?
- Yeah, so we use a very clever trick
that is called interferometry
that actually won the Nobel Prize back in the '70s
and by Martin Ryle, who designed this technique.
And what we do is, in fact,
it would be great to have a telescope
the size of the Earth that we could build,
like a giant Death Star in space
that we could look at that.
It would save us so much trouble, honestly.
But it turns out convincing funding agencies
to give us that kind of money wasn't really possible.
So we had to use this clever technique of interferometry.
And what we do with our technique is we sync up telescopes
that are at strategic locations around the earth.
They have to observe at the exact same time
and they're timed accurately by atomic clocks
that are so precise,
they lose about a second every million years.
And so these clocks time-
- They're big too, right?
They're like-
- They're about the size of a mini fridge, yeah.
- Wow, okay.
- Yeah, they're big and they're very expensive,
so we have to take really good care of them.
So there's one at each of our telescopes
that time tags the data as it arrives at each site,
and then we record that data onto hard drives,
and then we ship those hard drives to a central computer
in which all of the data from all the telescopes
are combined and aligned together
to synthesize a virtual telescope the size of the Earth.
So that's how we do it.
The telescope is not physically the size of the earth,
but we synthesize it using telescopes
that span the size of the earth.
- Right, so kind of like little different sensors
at 10, 15 locations. - Yeah, exactly.
- But you have to keep them in sync.
That's the big problem, right?
- Yeah, and timing is everything for what we do, yeah.
- Yeah, and you think about how off can you be?
You're talking the speed of light,
a little, a microsecond, you cover a lot of distance
than that time at the speed of light, right?
- That's right, yeah.
We have to be extremely accurate
because any shift in time between signals
means that we're no longer in the reference frame
of the black hole.
Everything that we see has to be in the reference frame
So it all has to be exactly aligned at the same time.
And there are many, many different aspects
in the instrumentation of each telescope
that needs to be measured very accurately
and corrected at the time of combining the signals.
And then we also go through a very lengthy data processing
step in which we correct all these additional effects.
We also have to deal with the Earth's atmosphere
because we observe at such a high frequency in the radio
which is 230 gigahertz.
We're dealing with very high frequency radio waves
and they're very affected by the atmosphere.
So water vapor and instability in the atmosphere
can scramble and destroy our signal.
So we have to correct it after the fact
and kind of model the atmosphere at each site,
remove it, and then we can average our data down
and build signal that way, build signal to noise.
And then finally, at the end of that,
all that processing is where imaging comes in.
And then we can combine the data with our imaging softwares
and then reconstruct images that best fit the data.
- Yeah, you've had a really cool visualization
showing how obviously the earth is curved.
I liked how you tried to reinforce that
- Yeah, I really hope people know that the earth is round.
Otherwise it would make our job very weird.
Yeah, we definitely have to take into account
the curvature of the earth
because of this delay in curvature,
two telescopes far enough apart
have to deal with the earth's curvature
because then the signal doesn't arrive
at the same time at each place.
It arrives down here earlier than it arrives here.
And so we have to take into account
this curvature difference
to make the signals be at the exact same time.
And we do that at the supercomputer stage.
- Yeah.
So let's, maybe let's follow the data for a minute.
'Cause I think that that's pretty interesting.
So it starts by things hit the different telescopes.
How many did you say were involved at the time?
- Eight, yeah.
Eight telescopes at six different locations.
- Yeah, you got these eight different telescopes
and they're all at different points on the earth.
So the signal's hitting them at different times
just because it's not a lot of time difference,
but it's enough to make a difference in the light waves
or the radio waves.
But then the next step gets pretty interesting
because it's not like we're using our fiber,
our gigabit connection to upload the data.
You record it to a huge block of hard drives
and you physically send the hard drives, right?
- Yes, that's right.
Yeah, they're basically just standard kind of helium drives
that we use just stacked together,
the kinds that are in laptops.
And then we record our data onto these hard drives.
They're kind of split into random folders
with some names that I can't decipher,
but people who work at the computer, supercomputers do.
And then we pack them up,
we drive them down each mountain
and then ship them usually via FedEx or UPS
to our two central correlation facilities
where we combine the data.
One is at MIT Haystack in Boston right here.
And then one is in Bonn, Germany
at the Max Planck Institute for Radiostronomy.
So they get half the data and they get half the data.
- Yeah, there's one guy who used to be a police officer
who is now in charge of logistics of the data.
- That's right.
Yeah, I always like telling the story of Don
because so Don Souza used to be a police officer
for the state of Massachusetts.
And then since then, for the last 20 years,
he's been dealing with the shipments
for MIT Haystack Observatory.
And all of the data goes for him,
including the ones that go to Bonn.
And he's been doing this for years
and he is our main shipping guy for the EHT.
And he's never lost a single package.
- That's incredible.
Yeah, there was just one, I think, funny mishap that happened once where we had a package
incoming from the South Pole that was meant to be our South Pole equipment.
And then he opened it and it was just a bunch of fabric.
So that was a little bit of an issue.
Yeah, I don't remember if it was silk, but I think it's just regular fabric.
But then luckily, with the help of the shipping company, the mishap was found and then the
fabric went to the rightful owner.
And then the equipment got returned to us.
So everything went well.
- Yeah.
You're like,
they didn't get what they expected
and we definitely didn't.
- That's right.
- How bad would it have been if you had lost it?
Would it have been catastrophic or would it have been just?
- So it wasn't data, it was just a piece of equipment.
It would have been expensive to get another one
and go through the tests
and it would have probably delayed a couple of things
but other than that, it would not have been catastrophic.
- Yeah.
- The other thing I think is interesting, as you said,
the color code, the hard drives with green ready to record
and empty and red being awful and they got to be processed.
- Yeah, we have little round stickers on our modules
that have the hard drives, that color code.
- Yeah, yeah, I mean, why not, right?
You want to look over and see like, oh, that pile,
that pile is going out, not coming in.
- Exactly, yeah.
And often at the sites we have spare modules
that we have just in case we have issues
recording onto certain ones.
So it's good to know which ones we've recorded on
and which ones are spare.
- Yeah.
So there's a lot of data here,
which is why you ship the hard drives.
Yeah, if you had a couple of gigabytes,
nobody wants to ship hard drives, right?
They can break, they can get lost.
It's relatively slow unless you have petabytes of data.
And then all of a sudden you realize
this is actually a problem.
I've been just doing some backups of all the podcast episodes and stuff that I did.
And they're like 20 gigs per episode and there's hundreds of 700.
I've been uploading for days, for four or five days.
I'm only through one of the podcasts for part of the time.
I'm like, this is insane.
And I'm so excited to appreciate just like how hard is it to send this much data?
So when you're talking petabytes, and these are remote locations as well for the
- Yeah. - Summer is often, right?
So maybe not the best connection.
- Yeah, I think it would be pretty much unfeasible
to send data from our sites,
especially the South Pole is our most remote location.
And during the South Pole winter,
the internet is not very good.
So we have to rely on some satellite connections
that happen twice a day.
And so the connections are about fast enough
that it would take about 40 years
to get all the data from the South Pole
that we take during our campaign.
So it's really just not feasible.
Our founding director always says
that you cannot beat the bandwidth
of a 747 filled with hard drives.
So shipping is always the best.
- Yeah, that's incredible, but apparently true.
- Yeah.
So we have a picture, right?
We have this amazing picture of the black hole.
We'll talk about the story about how we get it,
but maybe just describe it for people.
I'm sure everyone listening has seen it,
but it's maybe been a couple of years.
- Yeah, so this is the picture of the M87 black hole,
what we call the first image of a black hole.
We released this picture in April, 2019,
so three years ago now.
And this picture comes from our 2017 observing campaign,
and it is of the central black hole inside the galaxy M87,
which is 55 million light years away from us.
So the light you're looking at in this picture
is 55 million years old, which is pretty cool.
And when it left the black hole,
the first mammals were starting to appear on planet Earth.
- Wow, amazing.
- It's pretty cool, yeah.
So what we're seeing in the middle
is this kind of dark patch,
which we call the black hole shadow.
And there's this big ring of light around it.
And the dark patch is where the black hole lives inside.
And the reason why it's dark
is because inside there's the black hole's event horizon,
which is actually a little bit smaller than the shadow.
And the path of the light rays
that are around the event horizon makes the darkness
in which the light can no longer escape,
it makes it puff up.
And so the light rays kind of graze a bigger area,
which is why the shadow is actually bigger
than the event horizon.
And then this ring of light around it
is very, very hot gas.
So we're talking billions of degrees,
a hot gas swirling around in the black holes,
either accretion disk or bottom of its famous jet.
And this gas is swirling around so much that it's glowing
and it emits light in the radio,
which are those radio waves that we observe.
And so this is light that hasn't crossed the event horizon.
It's not close enough to be pulled in into the darkness
and not being able to come out,
but it's just close enough to show us
this shadow of the black hole.
It illuminates the darkness.
So there's all this mass has been attracted,
but it's like whipping around,
kind of like a toilet bowl, right?
The water is not just shooting through the hole.
It's kind of spinning,
but it's spinning near the speed of light
and there's lots of friction and stuff,
which makes it glow, right?
- That's right, yeah.
- And what about the jet?
Does the jet come from this accretion disk
or does it somehow come out of the black hole
or where is it coming from?
- It doesn't come out of the black hole,
but it does come pretty close,
from pretty close to the black hole.
So this image in particular didn't teach us too much
about the jet other than we can't see it in our image
because at the time we didn't have enough telescopes
to see the jet because it's very, very faint
at the frequency we're looking at.
But our polarization image, which came out in 2021,
which showed kind of a more spiral structure on top
that trace magnetic fields around the black hole,
showed us that the magnetic fields around the black hole
are kind of in a spiral shape that twist enough
and are ordered enough to be able to launch the jet.
So they're coming from the rotation speed
of the black hole that makes the kind of the space-time twist
and the magnetic fields twist, and that is launching the jet.
- Okay, amazing.
I was just thinking last night, getting ready for this
and doing some of the research,
you know, the black hole, the lights and all,
light and all that stuff goes into it, all this matter,
and it's completely dark, but inside,
It must have an insane amount of light and energy somehow in there, right?
If you could get into it, it must be really bright.
If none of the light ever created can ever leave, it must just be building up in there.
It's hard to tell.
I don't think you...
It would be completely...
It would be hard to explain what you would see inside.
Because once you fall in, space-time is getting stretched like crazy.
more in you go the more stretched it gets because it inevitably should end up in the singularity in
which all of space and time is compressed into a single point. So everything is kind of shifted and
spaghettified and so even the light ahead of you, you wouldn't be able to see it because it can never
travel back in the direction where you are. So wherever you're falling, whatever is in front of
you, you cannot see because it cannot go out. It can only go in and so but you can look back.
there's nothing. Yeah, maybe it's not right. Yeah, if you look back behind you at the horizon
and at the outside, you would see the entire history of the universe. Yeah, it's kind of a,
it's a very mind-boggling place and I think people do get very creative about what could
happen inside a black hole. What you would see, there are a lot of thought experiments around it,
but obviously because of the physical boundary that is the event horizon, we can never know what
as beyond. I often get this question in talks like, "Oh, what you show us is just the shadow
of the black hole. It's not the actual black hole itself," which I think is not a true question
because I don't think this statement is true because this is everything we can see of the
black hole. It is the black hole in the only way we can see it. Whatever is inside, we can never
see. So this is always a picture of a black hole. This is it. This is it. Yeah, this is as far as
you can go. You cannot go further in. Mel in the audience says, "Whoa, that is weird."
It definitely is weird. I think we get a lot of very emotional reactions whenever we talk about
kind of the whole aspect of looking at this image and what it represents, this end of space and time,
this kind of point of no return, and this whole kind of world of what is beyond it,
what is outside of it. Yeah, very strange. All right, so back to following the data along,
we've got petabytes of data collected to these hard drives on site at these six different
locations. They get shipped to the two places in Cambridge in the U.S. and in Bonn, Germany.
And then what happens? Yeah, then once all of the disks arrive, they get plugged into these
kind of readout machines that kind of reads out all the data from all the different sites.
And then we have supercomputers that align the data using a bunch of, it's a very complicated
machine, but it takes into account the Earth's curvature, a model of the Earth, the positions of
the telescopes, different instrumentation effects that we measure at the sites that get put into
this big model. And then all the signals between each pair of telescopes is aligned precisely
to maximize the detection. And then once all of them are aligned, what remains, so what we record
at the site is kind of all of the signal the telescope receives, which includes signal from
the black hole, but also the atmosphere, the surroundings, the air, the instrument, and stuff.
But because the only thing the telescopes have in common is the black hole signal,
the rest of the data doesn't, what we call, doesn't correlate. So it is not seen in common.
So at that point, a lot of the data that's noise,
we can get rid of because we only
care about what the telescopes see in common, which
is what comes from space.
And so then we can reduce the data from petabytes
to the hundreds of gigabytes level, terabyte, gigabyte
level.
And then at that point, after the correlation,
the data are ready to move on to the data calibration stage.
So we end up with kind of data files per observing day
of about maybe 100 gigabytes, 300 gigabytes,
kind of manageable for software.
Yeah.
And then at that point-
- You could transfer it over the internet
sort of levels of data.
- Kind of, yeah.
So usually we can put it on a common archive.
That's where we have it stored, the correlated data,
And then the data teams go in and get the data
and then process them through their software.
And we use cloud computing facilities
to do the data processing as well.
It really speeds up things.
- These are like big supercomputers in those two locations,
not like AWS or Azure, is it?
- No, they're at the locations, that's right, yeah.
Yeah, they're basically computer clusters.
- Okay, are they dedicated,
especially for this job or they?
- They're dedicated, especially for dealing
with radio interferometry data.
They don't necessarily, they're not used all the time by us.
They're also used a lot by geodesy experiments.
So geodesy is the science of studying
tectonic plates on earth.
So they basically do the exact opposite to us.
They use telescopes at different locations on earth,
looking at a common source that doesn't change.
And then in that way, they can track the movement
of the locations of the telescopes on earth.
And they do these observations many, many times
and that's where they get all combined.
And in fact, through geodesy,
that's how they get the model of the earth
that we use in our experiment
to correct for this movement of the telescopes.
So there's a kind of very nice cycle
that happens at the same location.
Yeah.
- Yeah, that is a symbiotic cycle.
That's great.
So it's in this calibration stage
where Python starts to make its appearance, right?
- Yeah, so we have our data processing softwares
are I think mostly built in, let's see,
Fortran and C code,
so more of the kind of heavier data crunching parts.
And then there are a number of kind of post-processing tasks
that do use Python,
Especially we have a kind of suite of post-processing tasks
that make use of pandas a lot,
because it offers a very neat data structure
that allows us to organize data corrections
across kind of different columns of types of data.
And that's been very helpful for us.
- Yeah, you also get a lot of the matrix multiplication,
vector math type of features.
- Yeah, a lot of that too.
Yeah, it's very helpful.
And it has made our data processing a lot cleaner
to do it through that data structure.
- Now this cycle where you take the data,
you factor out the atmosphere and other interference,
and then you add in all the good parts of the signal,
the positive parts of the signal
from the different telescopes.
You analyze it.
You said that this cycle goes around a couple of times
and takes like a year and a half or something, right?
Yeah, so from the time we took the data, which was in April 2017,
to the time we released this image in April 2019,
about one and a half years of that time was spent on the data processing
and this feedback loop between our correlation centers
and the data processing team.
I was part of the data processing team.
We were quite a small team working kind of around the clock
on a pretty fast turnaround,
is because we had kind of a lot of data issues identified
at each site that needed to be run down
and then going back upstream and then back down.
And we also had a feedback cycle with the imaging teams
that looked at early versions of the data
and then discovered issues
and then again, going back upstream.
So there was a long process of really trying to fix
all of the instrumentation parts
that would contaminate the black hole data.
And then eventually we finally had a dataset mature enough
that would allow for actual imaging.
And then once that was done,
where we're dealing with data files
in the kind of hundred megabytes sizes.
After data processing,
we could really average our data down.
So we're dealing with complex numbers.
The data we get from the black hole are complex visibilities.
They have an amplitude and a phase.
And in the data part--
- Seven plus two I, complex in that sense?
- Exactly, yes.
Yeah. And so because we have complex numbers,
if we try to average numbers in which the phase part don't align,
we end up destroying our signal because it's destructive interference.
So we needed to align the phases in order to average down our signal
to have constructive interference and build up signal.
And that's really the key part of the data processing.
That's what we do in order for the imaging teams to have the best data possible.
And then in the kind of 100 megabytes data,
Then we move on to our imaging software.
- Indeed.
A quick question from the audience.
What sort of wait times do you experience
when you're iterating on,
in this step when you're sort of working
and say, "Do you put a notebook and you press run?"
How long until you see the results?
I guess, what's the experience of working like this?
Is it a lot of batch processing
and you walk away for lunch,
or is it small enough that you're getting
immediate responses?
Yeah, so I think outside of the Python packages is where we run most of the big data crunching.
I think in those parts, it would take a couple of days to run through our calibration pipeline.
And then the Python parts would take maybe a couple hours.
Then when we're running diagnostic Jupyter notebooks, it would take maybe not long,
because then at that time, we're basically in the 100 megabyte parts, just doing data checks
in which we make use a lot of Jupyter notebooks, in fact,
and Matplotlib to plot through our entire data steps
and cross-check every part.
We have all these diagnostic notebooks that look at our data.
And those don't take much time to generate.
I would say maybe 20 minutes would generate
kind of a single suite from a Jupyter notebook.
Sure. Very interesting.
So most of the work is done by this supercomputer
and seeing Fortran and then you kind of are working with the raw answers in just numerical
form but you want them visual later, you want them correlated or things like that.
Yeah, then when we're really looking to diagnose our data to find instrumentation errors,
then visual representations are extremely useful and we've made a lot of use of kind of Jupyter
notebooks, especially in our data processing checks to make sure everything looks good
at each step of the pipeline.
All right.
One more audience question, then I'll move on.
Mellie asks, "Do you do logging or any staging to keep track of the stages they're at and
not in a loop?"
So...
Yeah.
So each data pipeline has multiple stages in which we have kind of checkpoints at each
stage where we have a suite of kind of Jupyter notebooks or our plots, a suite of plots generated
so that we can go back if there's an issue we can go back at each stage and look at the outputs and
make sure that we can generate or we can identify where the issue has happened or where the failure
has occurred. We have logs also of every process that comes in. We also do very strict version
control of each kind of software version.
Every time we run something, we do have a kind of version control package
of all the software within one single pipeline run
that we keep track of as well.
That's really interesting because you want to have reproducibility, right?
- And if-- - Absolutely.
Maybe something minor changed about the way Pandas does floating point operations.
I'm just making this up, but, you know, theoretically, over versions
and give you a slightly different answer, right?
So you want to have a really clear snapshot of the entire system, right?
That's right. And this was also very important for us
when we released the papers for this image.
We also released the versions,
version-controlled pipelines,
both on the data side and on the imaging side,
that contained the exact versions
and kind of container form of the software that we used
and the scripts that we used to generate these exact results.
How awesome. So this won the Nobel Prize, right?
It did not.
You did not?
No.
I don't know why I thought I did.
No, we won the Breakthrough Prize in Physics in 2019. Yeah.
It won the heart and the minds though.
You did point out in your talk about how much this made a splash among people who are not scientists.
Yeah, that was something that was very shocking for us because when we, building up the project,
obviously we had talked about the project in various media forums and it was interesting
in the astronomy community. So we knew there was some traction about the project that people would
be interested in the results. But we did not expect the magnitude at which this image would
really go into pop culture, especially the fact that the next day after this release,
it was on front pages of newspapers around the world, which is really unusual for science
results, especially around these times, 2019 was not the most happiest of years news-wise.
There was plenty of other stuff to occupy the news.
So it was definitely unusual.
It ended up trending number one on Twitter,
which is really surprising for science news.
We did not have a trending campaign really. We didn't prepare a hashtag.
It was not something, we were not really social media savvy kind of people.
It was not planned, it just kind of organically happened.
Then there were so many memes and references and we were
referenced on talk shows and documentaries and
news segments. So it was really beyond anything we had expected and there was a lot of demand also
to hear from us, not just from astronomy or physics academics but also a lot of demand
from planetariums and science camps and even museums. We did a bunch of talks at
museums which was really enjoyable and kind of reached a different audience and that was all
really cool. I think really nice experience to kind of reach out to the community and make sure
that people are part of it because these days science results happen in very big teams and
not just that our teams are funded by taxpayer dollars. They build on resources from various
communities including the developer community and programming and instrumentation community and
all the giants in physics that came before us. So it's really not just kind of a personal victory
as a member of our team, it's kind of a global effort.
And we want to make sure that we send a signal
that teamwork is really a global thing
and that big science happens in big teams
and that everybody's playing a part in this in some way.
- Are you familiar with the Mars Rover GitHub?
Not the rover itself, but the Mars,
the badge, I guess it's called.
- No, I don't think so.
- So people got this, for the people who worked on,
Where is this?
Oh, somebody show me the badge.
So,
yeah.
So for people who worked on the Mars Lander,
they got a special badge.
I don't know where it is.
- Oh, really?
Oh.
- I feel like there should be one of these as well.
- That would be cool.
- Right?
For the people that worked on this project,
it should be like a little black hole badge.
So I don't have it.
- That would be very cool.
- It's like a little badge,
like here's the Arctic contributor one.
There's a Mars rover.
And so people in GitHub out there,
let's make a black hole badge.
'Cause there's so many of these open source projects
that are indirectly used and contributors to it.
And they could have a black hole badge
and that would be awesome.
- That's a great idea.
I would be happy to reach out to people
and try to see if I can make that happen.
I think that would be really awesome.
- Yeah, yeah, indeed.
I don't know.
I think, I don't know the username
people to search for it. But anyway, I think that would be really cool. I think there should be a
badge. But let's go and talk Matplotlib for a minute. So here you are presenting this keynote.
- Yeah, my favorite.
- Yeah, tell us about this picture that you got here and then we can maybe dive into how you know
the picture that we see is actually the picture. - Yeah, this is my favorite plot ever,
which is kind of underwhelming when you show it to most people. But people who are radio astronomers
like me would be extremely excited seeing this. And this is really the first kind of depiction
of M87 I saw after we finished the data processing pipeline. This is before anyone made any image,
by the way. It was in May 2018 when we actually finished the very first run of the full pipeline
in data calibration. And this was the
endpoint, this plot.
And what this plot shows is kind of the
on the y-axis there's flux
density, which is basically the
the brightness of signal seen by pairs
of telescopes.
And then on the x-axis there is baseline
length, which tells us kind of the
the separation between pairs of
telescopes. So telescopes close together
see a lot of signal in common.
Telescopes far apart see kind of
a smaller signal in common.
And depending on their location,
they probe different sections of the image.
And so what we see here is this kind of,
how would I say that?
This kind of bump, double bump in the image.
And what this double bump actually tells us in the plot
is if you look at the dashed line,
this is what we would expect
if the image on the sky was a uniform ring.
Uniform as in the brightness along the ring
is the same everywhere.
So it's just a closed ring
and the brightness is the same everywhere.
And so it turned out that this bump structure
looked really close to a uniform ring.
And this was already really exciting
because we were already trying to imagine
what does the ring look like?
And this plot also tells us how big it is.
It tells us it was actually 42 micro seconds wide,
of this ring without any image.
And what was also really cool is that
if you look at the first dip location,
you will see that the data actually split into two levels.
There is a lower level and an upper level.
And these correspond to two different directions
on the sky that the stations are looking at.
The lower level are looking at the source
in the East-West direction, so across,
and they're seeing a kind of dip.
And then the other ones are looking at it
in the North-South and they're seeing more signal.
And what this difference tells us is that
the ring is not uniform,
but it's actually asymmetrical in the North-South.
There's one part that is brighter,
either North or South, that is brighter than the other side.
And if you look at our final image,
it is brighter on the bottom than it is at the top.
Whereas if you were to slice across,
you will see it's the same, right?
If you were to slice across, it's the same,
but if you were to slice like this,
you have less signal up here and more signal down here.
Already the plot told us so much
about what we're looking at.
- Yeah, yeah.
So before you had a picture,
you're like, "Oh, we think we're onto something here, right?"
- Yes, it was super exciting.
But then we were very careful because we thought,
"Okay, there's a lot we can tell from this plot,
but let's not try to get ahead of ourselves."
Because there are a lot of types of images
that could be tweaked to mimic this kind of structure.
And so that was kind of part of the next stages
in which we wanted to split our teams into,
our big imaging team into four independent teams.
And each team worked independently for about seven weeks
on analyzing the data in any means they wanted,
with any software they wanted, any decision they wanted.
And then we came together after seven weeks at a workshop
to compare the images.
And each team submitted a single image.
And it turns out that the images between the four teams
were very, very similar to each other.
And so that was really exciting.
And everybody got a ring of the same size,
42 microseconds and brighter on the bottom.
Even though there were kind of some small differences
across the images that came from the,
these user-based choices in the software,
still the main structure was there for everyone.
And I think that was one of my favorite days
in the collaboration because we had so much fun that day.
It was such a big relief because we
were using so many different techniques and imaging software
that we weren't sure we would all get the same answer.
So we were really relieved that we did.
And then at the end of the day, we all went drinking at a bar
and it turned out it was karaoke night.
So we all sang karaoke together.
It was such a lovely day.
Were there any space-themed songs like "Hello Major Tom"
or any of these things?
- We sang Black Hole Sun.
- Oh, there you go.
Yeah, that sounds good.
Right on.
- Yeah.
That was a must.
But we changed the lyrics to Black Hole Shadow.
- If you're taking petabytes of data
and running them through a bunch of algorithms
until they come down to megabytes,
or you said the final picture is actually
like less than one meg.
- Yeah.
- Then, you know, what you're seeing,
is that actually what you're seeing?
Or is that artifacts built up along the way?
Right. So this must have been really comforting to try these different algorithms and go, they all come up with the same picture.
Yeah, I think we were confident about what the data were telling us, but we wanted to make sure that we understood how our software were responding to the data.
So, you know, from kind of objective perspective, when we looked at the data plots, we knew what it was telling us.
But we wanted to make sure that we looked through every avenue of possible ways of creating images that look similar to the data.
And in fact, it's really very hard to create images that don't look like what we have.
And so no matter how much we tweaked our software, we would always end up with something very similar to the final image.
But we still wanted to put our software through this test and do a kind of process in which we would test it.
And in the end, the final stage ended up being trying to find what is the best kind of combinations
of our software choices that gave us the best image.
Because we generated so many images with user-based choices, and they ended up pretty similar
to each other with the base structure, but how do you pick one image?
So that was kind of the dilemma we had at the final.
We didn't know how to pick a single image, so we decided to create these kind of fake
data sets that mimicked our data in which we knew the real truth images and they looked like rings
or disks or double sources. And then we made our softwares go through thousands of combinations of
these parameters and kind of tested how well they could reproduce all four of them, all four images.
And then the ones that were kind of, we ranked them and then number one was the best image for
each software. And then the final image you know, the famous image of a black hole, is actually just
the average of the three software images, the three best images from the software. And this is
also only one image of the black hole. This is only April 11. We observed M87 for four days
in 2017. So we have four images of this black hole from 2017. And they all look the same, and they
And they all went through separate day observing,
separate processing, and always giving the same answer.
So you all are pretty sure that this is the picture.
Absolutely.
At least this is the radio astronomy picture.
Yeah, this is the picture at 230 gigahertz.
Yeah, exactly.
There's also pictures of that general space
with Hubble and some other things that you laid out.
Yes, this is a really fun part of our campaign also, because obviously we're trying, the purpose
of our experiment is to learn about black holes. We want, I mean, these objects are super fascinating.
They're kind of mind-boggling in how they exist and what they do to galactic environments.
These jets are enormous and they're pierced through entire galaxies, and yet they come from a very
tiny part of the galaxy itself. And so in really understanding black holes, it's obviously
really useful to look at one up close, but we need to combine that knowledge with how it looks across
all colors, all wavelengths. And so we had a big multi-wavelength campaign at the same time as
these observations across lots of different instruments. So we had instruments in the high
energy, in the x-ray, infrared, in optical, and also other radio wavelengths. So we had a lot of
of partnerships with other observatories, too,
to make that happen.
And we learned a great deal about the black hole
and its jet through that process.
Yeah.
It seems that black holes, supermassive black holes,
are a fundamental part of galaxies almost, right?
Absolutely.
They live in the centers of most galaxies.
And M87 is one of the special ones
because it has this big jet coming out of it.
So it's very nice to get a look at one
that has a jet up close.
And actually, our Milky Way black hole, Sagittarius A*,
is one of the very common boring ones.
And so the fact that we can have both of them
and look at both of them is kind of special
because it gives us kind of two very different classes
of black holes that end up looking very much the same.
Sagittarius A*'s image looks a lot like M87.
This is really just because, even though they're
totally different black holes, they differ in mass
by a factor of about 1,500.
And our Milky Way is a spiral galaxy, right?
But M87's galaxy is elliptical, and it's
much older and much bigger than our Milky Way.
And M87 has a jet, and Sagittarius A star
doesn't seem to have one.
So there are two very different black holes.
And yet, once you get up close, it's really just--
the effects of gravity is so strong
that it's really all you see.
And it's so cool that they look the same.
It is amazing.
I guess it's worth just pointing out
just how large the M87 black hole is.
Oh, yes.
The shadow of the M87 black hole could fit our entire solar
system very easily.
The orbit of Pluto would be about in the mid-range
inside the shadow.
And Voyager 1, which is the furthest human-made object,
would be just at the edge of the shadow right now.
Yeah.
It's very, very big.
If it were there, it would get sucked back in.
But if it were unaffected, it would be at the edge.
Yes.
Yeah.
So also 6.5 billion solar masses.
That's right.
Yeah.
That's really large.
It's actually one of the heaviest black holes
in our universe.
I think the current heaviest is about 10 billion solar masses,
maybe a little more.
So 6 billion is--
>> So it's not that much larger, yeah.
>> Yeah.
It's one of the pretty larger ones.
Yeah.
>> All right.
Well, we're getting a little short on time.
So let me close this out with a bit of a future-looking question.
And I'll give it to the ikuvu from the audience.
So what's next for EHT?
I'll ask it that way.
>> So since our 2017 campaign, we've kept observing.
We observed in 2018 where we added one telescope
and increase their bandwidth,
where we can have more sensitivity
in cooler observations of magnetic fields.
We also observed in 2021,
which was a kind of mid of COVID observation,
which was a very strange one.
And in 2022, we added two new stations after that.
So we're now up to 11 with the EHT.
And we're trying to expand our array
to have more telescopes.
So there's currently an effort
called the Next Generation Event Horizon Telescope.
So the EHT so far only borrowed telescopes
that just happened to be at the right locations
that were actually built
for completely different science programs,
just radio telescopes that were able to observe
at the frequency we wanted and at the right place.
So we didn't have much of a control
over the locations of the telescopes.
And so in order to see more of our image,
for example, to see the jet in M87,
we need a lot more telescopes.
So the next generation EHT plans to have more control
over where telescopes are gonna be put.
So we're planning to get smaller dishes
because we have the sensitivity now with the current EHT,
smaller dishes at the locations where we need them,
where we have holes in our virtual mirror
to recover this structure.
And eventually we'd like to observe more often.
So now we only observe two weeks a year.
We want to be able to observe every two weeks
every month and eventually we could make movies of M87 and also if we have enough telescopes we
would be able to make movies of Sagittarius A* as well and that will really show us the connection
between the black hole, the gas swirling around it and its jet and magnetic field. I think we
could learn so much about black holes through that. It would be so exciting. You could get precise speed of the
the creation disk and how it evolves. Yeah and that's about a 10-year time scale.
And then in the far future, in kind of 20 to 30 years,
members of our team are currently actively thinking
about putting satellites into space
since we're running out of earth diameter
to make bigger telescopes.
There's only two ways to make your telescope bigger,
either make the separation bigger
or go to higher frequencies so we have higher resolution.
And because of the earth's atmosphere,
and the size of the earth, we're limited in both.
But by going into space, we'd go above the atmosphere
So you can go to higher frequency
and you could have larger distances.
So by putting satellites into space,
we could have enough resolution to maybe see up to 10
or even 50 more shadows of black holes,
which would be really cool.
And then we'd have amazing sharp images
of the two that we know and love
to really test theories of gravity,
which would be terribly exciting.
But of course the technology to do that is not there yet,
but it is moving forward.
And it's something we're thinking actively about.
- It's getting there.
Another thing you pointed out was
all the results you got from this so far
still back up the general theory of relativity, right?
- That's right, yeah.
Einstein seems to be still correct.
Our black hole shadows are still very circular,
which is what Einstein's theory predicts,
but we need much sharper images to see bigger differences.
We were able to rule out some theories,
but there are still some theories that survive.
So we need to get to sharper and sharper images
and stronger and stronger tests.
But I think we're moving in that direction.
Our first image is really just opened this new laboratory
of images of black holes.
So it's gonna be an exciting new field.
- Yeah, this is possible.
Now let's build on it, right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
- Awesome.
All right, well, I think we'll leave it there
for the black holes, but congratulations to you.
And I know that all the other people,
Often you point out that you're just the representative
for this great big team.
- Yeah, I only play a small part.
It's really a big team effort and a community effort
and everybody is part of it.
- Yeah, indeed.
Now, before you get out of here,
let me ask you the final two questions.
I always ask, if you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor do you use these days?
- What editor?
Oh my God, I'm super boring.
I use GEdit.
(both laughing)
- You use what?
Sorry.
- Oh, perfect. Awesome. - Yeah, very boring.
And then, if there's any Python package library you want to give a shout out to,
maybe that was central to this work.
I know you already mentioned Pandas and Matplotlib.
Anything else that was really useful here?
Yeah, there was a really cool nested sampling algorithm
that was developed by a Harvard grad student called Dynasty
that was super useful for our modeling work
and really kicked off a lot of that analysis.
So I'd like to shout that out to you.
- And it's open source. - Yeah, fantastic.
Yeah, awesome. I'll put a link to it in the show notes for people.
Alright, well Sarah, thank you so much for coming on the show, for sharing your work.
It's, you know, as you saw, it's been an inspiration to everyone around the world.
So, thank you.
Yeah, thank you for having me.
Yeah, you bet. Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]